tutorial 4: simulation of oblique waves on a 2D planar beach
============================================================

In this tutorial we will consider the modelling of oblique incident waves on a 2D planar beach. These waves generate an undertow and a longshore current.

Our starting point here is the 1D model from the previous tutorial. We'll add some components to this model and modify it as needed.

To clearly see the effect of the longshore current, we will adjust some parameters of the 1D model.
First, we will increase the wave height from 0.5 m to 2 m. And second, we will make the seabed steeper, to 1:40.
Furthermore, to make things a bit more realistic, we let the waves enter the model with some directional spreading.
Finally, strong gradients in the current in the surf zone may lead to horizontal mixing. We will use the Smagorinsky model for this.

It is common to define the :math:`x`-direction as perpendicular to the shore, which is the cross-shore direction, and the :math:`y`-direction is the longshore direction.

step 1: prepare command file
----------------------------

Make a copy of the previous wave breaking model:

.. code-block:: bash

   cp wavbrk.sws obqwav.sws

or, for Windows:

.. code-block:: bat

   copy wavbrk.sws obqwav.sws

step 2: modify command file
---------------------------

Modify the file ``obqwav.sws`` according to the following instructions:

#. extend the model domain in :math:`y`-direction with a length of 200 m
#. choose a rather coarse mesh size :math:`\Delta y = 20 \Delta x`
#. apply periodic boundary conditions to both the northern and southern boundaries to avoid boundary effects
#. redefine the bottom as a 2D field with an offshore depth of 23 m
#. include the Smagorinsky model to allow horizontal mixing
#. impose irregular waves generated by a Jonswap spectrum on the west boundary with a height of 2 m, a period of 10 s, a direction of 15 degrees, and a directional spreading of 12 degrees
#. include the output parameter ``MVEL`` defined as the depth- and phase-averaged wave-induced velocity vector (averaged over 20 minutes)
#. add a transect in the middle, :math:`y = 100` m, which extends along the entire model domain perpendicular to the shore, for output of, among other things, ``MVEL``
#. include the ``BLOCK`` command to make a snapshot of the depth- and phase-averaged velocity vectors :math:`(U,V)` in the whole computational domain;
   make sure the file extension is ``.mat``

.. attention::

   Since the deepest part is set to 23 m (making a beach slope of 25/1000 = 1:40), :math:`kd \approx 1` which implies 1 vertical layer.

.. tip::

   Access the commands directly through this `page <https://swash.sourceforge.io/online_doc/swashuse/swashuse.html#index>`_.

   - Regarding the first three instructions, see the keyword ``CGRID``.
   - Look at keywords ``INPGRID`` and ``READINP`` for point 4.
   - For point 5 see ``VISCOSITY``.
   - For point 8 see ``CURVE``.

If you can't figure out how to deal with these instructions, copy the text below::

   !************* HEADING ********************************************
   !
   !  tutorial: oblique directional spread waves over 2D sloping beach
   !
   !*********** MODEL INPUT ******************************************

   CGRID  0. 0. 0. 1000. 200. 1000 50 REPEAT Y

   INPGRID BOTTOM 0. 0. 0. 1 1 1000. 200.
   READINPUT BOTTOM 1. 'bathy.txt' 1 0 FREE

   NONHYDROSTATIC
   BREAK
   FRIC MANNING 0.02
   VISC SMAG

   BOUND SHAPE JONSWAP SIG PEAK DSPR DEGRees
   BOUND SIDE West CCW BTYPE WEAK ADDB CON SPECTrum h=2. per=10. dir=15. dd=12. cycle 20 min

   DISCRET UPW  MOM
   DISCRET UPW WMOM H NONE

   !************* OUTPUT REQUESTS ************************************

   QUANT DIST HEXP 10.
   QUANT HS MVEL DUR 20 MIN

   CURVE 'transect' 0. 100. 1000 1000. 100.
   TABLE 'transect' NOHEAD 'output.txt' DIST BOTLEV HS SETUP MVEL

   BLOCK 'COMPGRID' NOHEAD 'output.mat' LAY 3 XP YP BOTLEV MVEL

   COMPUTE 000000.000 0.05 SEC 003000.000

   STOP

and also copy this ``bathy.txt``::

   23. -2.
   23. -2.

step 3: run simulation
----------------------

In general, two-dimensional phase-resolved wave models are computationally intensive, especially when more than one vertical layer is involved.
However, we can speed up the computational workload by distributing it evenly across a number of CPUs and then run these CPUs simultaneously.
This way of improving performance of demanding HPC workloads is known as the MPI paradigm.

Current laptops in most cases have at least 4 CPUs. Let's run our simulation with 4 CPUs, as follows:

.. code-block:: bash

   docker run -v .:/home/swash delftwaves/swash swashrun -input obqwav -mpi 4 > swashout &

Depending on your laptop, it will take a few minutes for the simulation to complete.

.. tip::

   You may deploy your model simulation in the cloud, for instance, with `Azure Container Instances <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/container-instances/>`_.

.. important::

   It is good to know that the scalability of parallel runs in Docker containers is not optimal.
   Instead of Docker it is better to use Apptainer or Singularity. Such container platforms are available by default on HPC clusters.

step 4: post processing
-----------------------

Adjust files ``mkplot.m`` or ``mkplot.ipynb`` as needed and apply them for output.

You can also make a quiver plot of the spatially-varying wave-induced current by entering the following commands in Matlab:

.. code-block:: matlab

   clear all
   load output
   figure
   quiver(Xp(1:5:end,1:10:end),Yp(1:5:end,1:10:end),Mvel_x(1:5:end,1:10:end),Mvel_y(1:5:end,1:10:end),0.7)
   axis([500 1000 0 200])

or in Jupyter Notebook:

.. code-block:: python

   import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
   import numpy as np
   import scipy.io
   mat=scipy.io.loadmat("output.mat")
   xp=mat.get('Xp')
   yp=mat.get('Yp')
   U=mat.get('Mvel_x')
   V=mat.get('Mvel_y')
   fig, ax = plt.subplots()
   q = ax.quiver(xp[1::5,1::10], yp[1::5,1::10], U[1::5,1::10], V[1::5,1::10],scale=10)
   ax.set_xlim(500,1000)
   ax.set_ylim(0,200)
   plt.show()

what next?
----------

If you have completed all four of these tutorials then you should have essentially acquired the necessary skills to run your own SWASH simulations.

It is wise to install the SWASH executable on your own machine. More information about this can be found :ref:`here <install>`.
It is also a good idea to study `this section of the manual <https://swash.sourceforge.io/online_doc/swashuse/swashuse.html#setting-up-your-own-command-file>`_
thoroughly before you run your first wave model simulation.

Good luck!
